Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to finally push our application up onto the web so that we can share it
with our friends and family.
So up until this point in the course, we've used our personal physical computer as the environment
to run our server dogs file.
That's great, but it means that we are the only ones that can access our node application.
So our goal for this lesson is to send our files to a hosting company, and they will run our node application
in their environment or on their hardware, and they'll make sure that it's publicly available around
the clock from a normal web address instead of local host.
All right, so without further ado, let's get started.
There are countless web hosting companies out there, but I don't want you to have to spend even a single
penny right now on hosting while you're just learning and experimenting.
And I can't think of too many hosts that offer free plans that do not require you to enter a credit
card.
And it let you run server side node applications.
So not just cloud functions or lambda functions, but actual ongoing node applications on the server
side.
Actually, the only company I can think of that offers that for free is Heroku.
So Heroku is what we're going to use in this course.
I'm not affiliated with them in any way.
I do not benefit when you use their service.
I just think they have one of the coolest free plans out there.
This is the hosting platform that I recommend you use, and this is what I'm going to show you how to
use in this lesson.
So right now in a new tab, go ahead and Google for Heroku, it should just be Heroku dot com.
Big Picture Before we can send Heroku our files, we need to first sign up for a free account.
So from the homepage, there should be a sign up button in the top right corner.
Let's go ahead and click on that.
The great thing about Heroku is that we can use it for free, and it's not some gimmicky, limited free
trial.
We don't even need to enter any sort of payment information whatsoever.
So go ahead and fill out this registration form and feel free to pause the video while you do that and
then submit the form.
As soon as you submit the form, you should see a screen asking you to go check your email to confirm
your account.
So go do that right now.
Check your email.
You should see an email from Heroku with an activation link.
Be sure to click on that activation link at that point.
Heroku will ask you to set up a password.
So go ahead and create a new password and then submit this form.
Cool.
And then we should be welcomed to Heroku.
Let's go ahead and click this.
Click here to proceed button.
And from this Heroku dashboard, we should see an option down here to create a new app.
If you do not see this option down here, you can also use this menu towards the top right that says
new and then click on Create New app.
So I'll click on this down here.
Create new app.
First, we need to choose a name for this new app.
Now, this name does need to be unique, so if I type in to do app, you can see that someone has already
taken that name, so you might need to experiment to find something that no one's used before.
Maybe I'll try to do app for course.
Cool.
That's available, so you'll need to type in something different and totally unique here and then choose
your region.
And then finally, let's just click Create app.
From this next screen, the deploy screen, we need a way to send our code files over to Heroku now
in just a few minutes from now, if you scroll down just a little bit.
We're going to use this deployment method called GitHub, or essentially where you just connect your
GitHub account to your Heroku account.
It is much, much easier to set up than using the Heroku Seelye option.
However, before we actually connect it to GitHub and send over our files, let's first make sure that
our files make sense not just for a local hosted private computer, but that they also make sense for
a public Heroku server.
So to do that, jump into voice code with our project open that we've been working on the To-Do app
folder, and you and I know that Server Dogs is the main file that you execute to actually start our
application.
However, Heroku can't read our mind.
It doesn't know which file to launch the application from, so we need to spell out that Server Dogs
is sort of our main entry point into the application to set that up.
All we need to do is jump into our packaged JSON file and we're interested in this scripts area.
We want to have a script called Start.
Now, if you downloaded one of the zip files at the end of each lesson, or if you're using a recent
modern version of Node, your packaged JSON file probably already has a script named Start.
That's perfect.
However, if you don't see a start script, here's what you can do.
I'll actually delete it and type it in again with you.
We just want to make sure we have a script with the exact specific name of Start, so quotes around
start, then a colon quotes for the command and the command to execute that file is just node and then
a space.
The name of the file we want to run is server dot jets.
I'll go ahead and save that file.
OK, and we're almost there.
What we need to do now is jump into server J.S. and remember that our application runs on port three
thousand right.
So that's why when we visited local host, we also typed in colon three thousand.
Remember, we set up this line of code that says APT.
Listen on that port number.
Well, that makes sense when the application is running on our computer, but we don't know which port
number Heroku will want to run our application on.
So we need to make this code dynamic so that it works with three thousand on our computer.
But if it's running within the context of a Heroku computer, it uses whatever their magical number
is.
So do this with me up towards the top of this file.
Maybe right below this let Deb line.
Let's add a new line and say let port equal and then to get the exact port number that the Heroku environment's
going to want.
We can say process, dot, EMV, dot, all uppercase port.
So if this exists, if we are within the Heroku environment, that will make sense.
But then right after that, we want to set up the number of 3000 as a fallback so we can write an if
statement if parentheses curly brackets within the condition.
For our if statement, we can say if port double equals sign, if it equals null.
So if it hasn't been defined or if it's nothing, or if port double equal sign is just an empty string
of text or is nothing, if this is the case, then within our curly brackets we can just set port to
equal three thousand.
So this way, in any environment, our port number will make sense.
Now we just need to actually use this port variable that we just created.
So down on this line of code, when we say App Dot, listen within the parentheses, get rid of three
thousand.
And just use our port variable instead.
Cool.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
At this point, we are ready to send this entire folder worth of files over to GitHub.
Let me explain.
So back in Heroku, we need a way to take our code files and send them to Heroku.
And the easiest way to do that is to use GitHub.
If you are already familiar with Git and GitHub.
That's great.
You really don't need to pay too much attention to the next couple of minutes.
However, if you've never even heard of Git or GitHub or you have no idea how to get started, I want
you to be able to follow along with this project as well.
So here's what you can do in a new tab visit GitHub dot com.
It is completely free to sign up for an account doesn't cost a penny, and you don't need to enter a
credit card.
So if you do not already have a GitHub account right now, pause this video and go sign up for a GitHub
account.
Once you have your new free GitHub account, you can come back and resume this video and then you're
going to want to install GitHub desktop onto your computer.
So the web?
Dress for that is literally just desktop dot, GitHub dot com.
Or if you just Google for GitHub desktop, this should be one of the first results.
So go ahead and download that it's available for Windows and Mac.
Just install that program and go ahead and pause this video and then come back and resume the video.
Once you've installed and opened GitHub desktop, when you open the application for the first time,
it'll look something like this.
You can see I'm not even signed into the app yet because I use Git from the command line, but this
is not a course about Git and learning it on the command line.
So right now, if you've never used Git before, we just want you to have the easiest, simplest route
to be able to push files up to GitHub.
So just go ahead and sign in with your GitHub dot com account.
It'll open a web page where you need to sign in with your username and password, and then it wants
you to authorize GitHub desktop.
So just go ahead and give it the default or full permissions that it wants, then allow it to launch
the application.
And now you'll be logged in from within GitHub desktop.
From this screen, we want to create a brand new repository, so let's use this button that reads Create
a new repository on your hard drive.
So click that button.
The name doesn't really matter.
You can name it anything that makes sense to you personally.
I'll name it JavaScript to do app next.
We don't need to change this local path option, but just make sure you take note of where it's pointing
towards.
So, for example, it's probably somewhere in your documents folder and it'll create a new folder called
GitHub.
So we'll see where that comes into play in just a moment.
Let's be sure to check this checkbox that says Initialize this repository with a read me.
OK, now we can go ahead and click Create repository.
OK, now this is where that GitHub folder comes into play.
So on my computer now, if I go into the documents folder, I have this new folder called GitHub.
So I want you to find and locate this folder on your computer.
And then if you go into that GitHub folder, you'll see a folder with that project or repo name we just
chose.
So I made up a name of JavaScript to do app.
You probably chose something different.
It doesn't matter, but just go into that folder.
It's empty, except for the Read Me file that GitHub created for us.
And what we want to do now is just sort of copy and paste or drag and drop all of our code files into
this directory.
So in my case, the code that we've been working on for the last ten or so lessons, here it is to do
app.
So I'm just going to go into that folder, right?
These are the files that should look familiar.
Server yes.
Packaged JSON.
So all the files from vs code, essentially, I'm just going to select all of those and then copy and
paste or drag and drop them into this new folder.
Cool.
Now this will be the copy of the files that you actually edit and maintain going forward.
So I'd recommend closing all current instances of vs code.
And then when you reopen that folder, you would open this folder in vs code.
Cool.
However, let's go back to GitHub desktop, and it is aware of all of the new files and folders that
we just moved into that project.
However, you'll see that there are some really large number here when it's counting how many files
have been changed.
This is because it is needlessly keeping track of the Node Modules folder.
We don't need get to track these files because as long as we have our packaged JSON grocery list file,
well, we're always just one command away of npm install from getting all of these thousands and thousands
of files back.
So to tell Git to just ignore this node modules folder, here's what you can do in GitHub desktop.
Click the repository menu up in the very top menu bar and then click repository settings.
That will open this screen, and then we're interested in this ignored files option, click on that
in this area.
Just type in node underscore modules.
Forward slash.
Go ahead and click Save.
Perfect.
So now get knows that it doesn't need to track those files.
And these are really the only core files of our project that matter.
At this point, we're ready to move forward.
So in get first, you would commit your changes.
So in this area, I'll just give a summary of first push of all files.
The message doesn't matter.
This is just for your own history and organization.
And then it's falling off the bottom of my screen, but down at the very bottom.
Just click the commit to main button.
Cool, now that we've committed those changes locally on our computer, the last step is just to actually
push them up onto the web to GitHub, to push it to GitHub servers.
We're just going to use this button right here that says Publish Repository.
So let's click on that.
These settings look great and absolutely do.
Make sure that this keep this code private checkbox is checked.
I want you to keep this private because in our server dogs file, we have our MongoDB username and password
in that connection string.
So we definitely want to keep that private.
Now, don't worry.
Later in the course in our complex app project, we will learn about something called environment variables
that can handle sensitive values like that in an industry standard.
Best practice way.
But for now, in this simple project, just making this repository private will be OK.
Let's go ahead and click Publish Repository as soon as you click that button, even on a slow internet
connection.
It shouldn't take more than maybe 20 seconds at the very most.
It should be very quick, and now we are ready to go back into Heroku and connect GitHub to Heroku.
So remember at the start of the video when we create a new project in Heroku and then from this deploy
screen, remember we're going to choose a deployment method.
And we said that the GitHub option is by far the easiest option.
So right now, go ahead and click that connect to GitHub button that you see here in Heroku.
If you can't remember how to get to the screen in Heroku, remember you just view your project and then
it is the Deploy tab or this deploy link right here.
You just scroll down a tiny bit and then click Connect to GitHub.
The very first time you do this, so it's just a one time setup.
You need to tell GitHub that you're giving it permission for Heroku to connect to it.
So Heroku will probably open a new window, a new pop up, and it's really just GitHub saying, Hey,
do you really want to give permission to Heroku to access your GitHub account?
Absolutely, we do.
We trust Heroku.
So click yes or give permission or whatever the positive button is.
Then back from this main screen in Heroku, you will be able to search through all of your GitHub repositories.
So I know I named my repo JavaScript to do app.
But if you don't remember the name, you can just click the search button here that will show you all
of your repositories.
But once you find the actual specific one that we're interested in, just click this Connect button
right here.
Cool.
Now, if we just scroll down a little bit.
Go ahead and click this Enable Automatic Deploys button.
So now in the future, whenever you push a new change to your GitHub repo, Heroku will automatically
rebuild your application.
But for this very first time, let's just scroll down and perform an initial deploy.
So down at the very bottom manual deploy click deploy branch.
Right now, Heroku is downloading all of our dependencies from our packaged JSON file.
It's getting our project ready, and now you can see your app was successfully deployed.
You can either use this view button here or back up at the very top of your project.
You can always use this open app button.
If you can't find that open up button, that's OK.
All it's going to do is take you to an address that is your unique app name.
Dot Heroku app, dot com.
Cool.
So we can see when I try to visit that URL.
This is that basic password protection that we set up in our previous lesson.
So I chose a username of learn in a password of JavaScript.
You might have chose different values, but if I log in, awesome, here's our application.
I can try to create a new item, say by tea that's working, I can try to update it to add exclamation
marks.
That's working, and I can try to delete that item.
Perfect.
If you made it this far, I want you to give yourself a huge pat on the back.
You now have a living breathing URL.
Granted, your new URL will be different for this first part.
Whatever your unique app name is, but you can now share your URL with your friends, family, anyone
that you want to impress.
And let them know that you built this full stack JavaScript application from scratch.
This is a huge accomplishment, and I really want you to relish this moment of sharing this application
with the people, you know.
Be sure to tell them a bit about what you've learned so far.
Have them add a few sample items to the list.
Take your time because I really don't want you to get burned out.
It's important to have lots of small victories along the road towards becoming a developer and completing
this application is our first significant victory.
So soak it in.
Enjoy the moment if you want to take a small break before jumping into the remainder of this course,
where we build our more complex app number two.
That's totally fine.
The most important part is that you just don't get burned out and that you stay excited about this process,
and nothing is going to get you more excited than sharing your progress with the people you care about.
So enjoy this moment.
Maybe go celebrate a bit and then our very next lesson we are going to address what's next.
We're going to talk about where we go from here and take a look ahead at the more complex app number
two we're going to begin work on.
So excited for you.
Let's keep our momentum rolling and I'll see you then.